# High-frequency thermal dynamics of the Cape Peninsula coastline in kelp forests

This site provides access to all raw data and R scripts utilised in the analyses for this paper.

Coastal thermal dynamics present an abundance of diversity. In situ temperatures and external phenomena such as upwelling and atmospheric temperature among others are factors that may influence these thermal dynamics. Shallow-water coastal ecosystems such as the complex kelp forests are more vulnerable to the changing climate than those in the open ocean because their temperatures are more likely to fluctuate suddenly and drastically. Kelps create and support complex habitats for a wide range of organisms, so while the environmental dynamics’ influence on kelp is important here, there is also a focus on these other organisms. In situ temperatures are influenced by and influence other ocean and atmospheric phenomena. During this investigation of sub-daily temperature dynamics in kelp forests at Oudekraal, Kommetjie, Miller’s Point and Glencairn on the inner and outer peninsula of Cape Town, Western Cape, short time intervals (30-seconds) were measured to account for the high-frequency changes in temperature. All environmental factors considered; we can conclude that there is no one factor alone that drives the thermal dynamics in a kelp forest. The minimum and maximum temperatures recorded were well within kelp reproductive limits. The daily temperature fluctuations show a strong diurnal nature, but they do not indicate how rapidly upwelling occurs. There is a strong correlation between the occurrence of SW winds and the low temperatures of upwelling events, while NW blowing winds potentially caused a decrease in the rates of change in temperature. The water velocity does not influence the water temperature, and the physical features surrounding the logger localities seem to have little to no influence on the water velocity within a kelp forest either. There were minimal spatial temperature differences within and between the sites.
